Part One - Shadow
It had been three months since Nova arrived at the compound. Three months of adjusting to a new atmosphere, a new gravity, a new life. Although she didn’t think she was really adjusting at all. She tapped her ID card to the left of the door to her unit and rolled her neck as the door opened with a quiet whoosh. Inside, her parents and aunts and uncle sat around the screen in the living space, chatting quietly about the updates coming from a young, bubbly presenter waxing on about the benefits of living in this community. More and more climate refugees arrive every day, adding to the unique culture yet to be developed, chirped the presenter with her wide smile and bouncing blonde hair. Nova rolled her eyes. There were several presenters who spewed the gospel of the compounds but this one bothered Nova the most, she called her the Master Minion in her head. She waved hello to her family as she walked to her room, dropping onto her cot/bed. 
She was one of the lucky ones. Both her parents worked for Space for the Future, spending their entire careers in the pursuit of terraforming Mars. And here they were. In compound number 16 of 109 (and counting), Kaveh. Each compound was named after a star but they were going to hold competitions and “town halls” to vote on things like their compound’s motto, bird, and designing a flag. All things to make the people living in the compound feel a part of a community. It made Nova sick to her stomach. 
Each compound could house 750-1,000 people. They each had schools, parks with artificial sun and breezes, several cafeterias and resource centers where people could acquire other food and items needed for daily life. There were observation decks, recreation halls, sick bays, and resources to help people find new work. Not for money, per se, late stage capitalism was one of the reasons they were on Mars in the first place. Of all the changes, Nova didn’t really mind that up here, people had the same living quarters, same food, same resources. The first several compounds were reserved for the uber wealthy, but her parents had explained that they weren’t even that much different. Space for Future was about getting everyone off of Earth, if they could. 
Nova wished she could share in her family’s excitement. For her parents, this was their life’s work. They had a direct hand in the creation of this and other compounds, both being engineers and working on the water and air filtration systems. She shared a room with her aunt, her dad’s younger sister. She was a kindergarten teacher on Earth and now one on Mars. Recess was never canceled with an artificial climate. Her other aunt and uncle were doctors so they, too, continued their work seeing patients. Nova had been a freelance artist and graphic designer. Her mother had told her about an opportunity to work on the website and create graphics for the compound but that made Nova feel… Icky. There was no monetary pressure to find a “real job” here so she would sometimes volunteer at the children’s ward of the sick bay, drawing and painting with them. Everyone who arrived at the compound went on mandatory quarantine for two weeks, but some people, especially kids, needed more time to adjust to the differences. 
	Nova turned to her side and picked up her tablet from her bedside table, swiping through the pamphlets her parents had sent her on the benefits of Kaveh, how to be a good community member, and a pointed one about a group for those struggling with the transition. She had some messages from old friends on other compounds. It was harder to hear from Earth, those transmissions were mostly saved for the main base so they could coordinate travel and disbursement. She looked over to her aunt’s side of the room. It was filled with drawings from her students, both from back home and from her new class. It was depressingly easy to figure out which pictures were from which students. The ones on Earth all drew about spaceships and spacesuits, traveling away. The ones here drew pictures that were… normal. Families, parks, swimming. It looked like pictures Nova would’ve drawn as a kid, sitting at her grandma’s kitchen table. She tried not to think of her grandma too much. 
	Farrah loved Earth. Then again, she had the benefit of enjoying it before everything became a shit show. Her cramped apartment was full of plants and grow lights. She had a plot at the community garden in her neighborhood and would take Nova there, pointing out the different fruits, vegetables, and flowers she and her neighbors planted. Talk about the ones that couldn’t or wouldn’t grow there anymore. She would take her swimming before the lakes became too polluted, taught her how to forage and preserve, how to set traps and make her own bow and arrow. While her parents prepared for a future in the sky, her grandma prepared her for survival on Earth. 
	Their arguments would get heated, her father and grandma’s. He wanted her to come with them, to be ready and excited for a future with endless possibilities, he said. She refused. She was old and stubborn as hell. 
	“My body will return to the earth and nourish it. When humans are all gone and no one is left to wring out every last drop of life from nature, I will be a tree. That is my future.” 
	As things got worse, the droughts, the heat, the desperation, she only agreed with Nova’s father on one thing. Nova had to go. 
	“I know it’s cliche and I know you don’t want to hear it but it’s the truth. You’re young, baby, you have your whole life ahead of you. And I am so sorry that it’s not viable here but it just isn’t. I taught you everything I know but it isn’t enough,” her grandma said to her. Nova did everything she could, she bargained, cried, screamed, called her grandma a hypocrite. But she wouldn’t budge. Finally, Nova started planning an escape. She was an adult, she could do what she wanted, but she had always stayed with her family for convenience, love, safety. There were renegade climate activists all over the place, she could join them and learn to survive with them. 
	The day Nova planned to leave, her grandma beat her to it. It was an uncharacteristically cool day, one Nova thought was a good omen. She met up with friends (for the last time, she thought) and they could stand to be outside for almost an hour. When she got home everything was quiet. Her dad was at the kitchen table with his head bent and her mother was rubbing his back. They barely looked up when she walked in. 
	“She left,” Nova’s father said hoarsely. It took her a moment to figure out what he meant, but when she did she ran to her room, opened up her closet and removed a panel from the wall. She had been hoarding supplies in her grandfather’s old backpacking pack. It was gone. In its place was a dusty old show box with the name Boston Store on it. 
She slowly pulled it out and opened it. Inside it there was a note from her grandma, explaining that she was sorry for stealing her stuff (and her plan) but not sorry enough to not do it. She told Nova she loved her and wanted her to move on from Earth, to have a life and not just survive. She left her her grandpa’s wedding ring, her favorite book, Garden Spells, a paper weight with moss and a beetle encased in resin, and various family photos, real, printed out photos, from when grandma was young, her wedding, her father as a baby, her parent’s wedding, and the most recent one, from Nova’s 1st birthday, in her father’s arms with her mother beside her and both her grandparents behind them. 
	The fight left Nova that day as something else cracked and died. She packed, she said her goodbyes, she boarded the ship. She left earth, her grandma, and her heart behind. She thought of her grandma every day in her strange new home, the picture from her birthday the only item up on her otherwise barren walls. She gazed at it as she fell asleep. 
	Nova woke slowly the next morning. Amazed that she slept through her aunt coming into the room and starting her nightly chainsaw sessions with her snoring. Her aunt was already up and at work by the time Nova stood up, stretched, and shuffled into the living area, eyes barely open. She almost got to the bathroom before stopping abruptly by the kitchen table, where her parents were sitting with a familiar, bubbly blonde. 
	“Oh, honey, you’re awake,” her mother said kindly but also with a look to the clock on the wall. “We wanted you to meet Layla,” she gestured to the blonde at the table who stood up and walked over to Nova, holding out her hand. 
	“Hi Nova! It’s wonderful to meet you! Isn’t it a great day in Kaveh?” Layla grinned widely and tilted her head to the side. 
	Oh god, no. Nova thought, recognizing Layla once she opened her wide, smiling mouth. It’s the Master Minion. 

Part Two - Light
	Nova was deeply unhappy with her parents. She followed behind a chattering Layla, not listening to a word the woman said, bouncing with every step. Bouncing, for god’s sake. After the initial shock wore off, Nova’s parents explained that since she so kindly volunteered (um, no she didn’t) to work on the website that Layla would take her to key parts of the compound and so she could be more familiar with her new home and translate the warmth and acceptance of the physical world into the digital space. Or whatever. 
	While Layla continued to bounce (bounce!) down the hallway, pointing out this or that, waving and greeting people, Nova glowered behind her, arms crossed. No amount of glaring seemed to dampen her spirit or her curls, which had a mind of their own, swishing this way or that as Layla pointed here and there. It was a bit distracting, actually. 
	“And then when the humidity reaches above 45%, the extra moisture is wicked from the air and filtered through the non-potable water system.” Layla turned around abruptly to smile at Nova who stumbled to a stop. 
	“Wait, what? Oh, um, okay,” Nova said, looking around bewildered. Layla laughed. 
	“I’m sorry, I know I get too excited about the ventilation systems,” Layla grins, a little self conscious. “I usually have a script when I’m doing the announcements, otherwise I’m just gabbing about with David and Ana or the others. I understand not everyone is excited or interested in water filtration or the toilet compost systems.”
	It turned out that Layla wasn’t just a talking head. She worked with Nova’s parents (the aforementioned David and Ana) and had worked for Space for Future for almost ten years, starting as an intern when she started college at 16. She was so intelligent, charismatic, and empathetic that the TV crew immediately poached her for late afternoon slots, after her regular shift. This was all told to her very quickly and with meaningful tones by her parents. If Layla thought anything was weird about Nova’s parents spouting off her credentials, she didn’t let on. 
	“So!” Layla clapped her hands together once, surprising Nova. “What is your favorite part of living on Kaveh?”
	Silence. Layla waited. More silence. People passed by in the hallway. Nova practically heard the proverbial crickets chirping. Not that she ever heard crickets in real life, they had been extinct for a while. Layla’s smile wavered a bit and Nova sighed. 
	“Look, I’m not really… Drinking the kool aid, if you know what I mean?” Nova winced as she said it. Most of her references came from her grandma. 
	“No cyanide in this Flavor Aid!” Layla grinned at her. 
	“Wait, you get that reference?” Nova asked. 
	“Oh yeah! I got really into researching cults when I was a teen.” Layla said, offering no further explanation. 
	“Um, okay…” 
	“But seriously, there are so many wonderful things here! There’s nothing you can think of?”
“Mm… No?” Nova said. Layla looked at her for a moment, and then something shifted in her eyes. 
“All right, come with me!” Layla turned on her heel and continued down the hall at a quick pace. Nova jogged a little to catch up, muttering “I was already following you.”
They made their way to the sick bay, not at all where Nova was expecting them to go. Layla pointed out different areas and services they provided, waving at more people as they went along. She seemed to know everyone. They made their way to a door with a scanner on it and she pulled her ID badge and scanned it. The doors opened. Nova was surprised, why would Layla have secure access in the sick bay? Perks of designing the place, she guessed. 
	Layla stopped in front of a window into a smaller room. Inside there were… babies? The room was filled with hospital bassinets but only three babies were in the room. A nurse covered in scrubs, a hairnet, face mask, and gloves was looking at the chart for the bassinet that held twins. One baby had its little arm around its sibling. They seemed to be sleeping. The other baby kicked its legs slowly, wiggling a little bit. They were so… small. So many tubes coming out of them. Layla looked at her meaningfully. 
	“Um… babies?” Nova said, unhelpfully. Layla let out a little laugh, Nova was expecting something high and girlish but her laugh was deeper. 
	“The first babies born here! In all the compounds,” Nova looked on proudly as if they were her babies. 
	“They’re so small. Are they okay?” Nova asked, looking back at all the tubes. 
	“From what I’ve heard, they will be. Their mothers were induced and the babies delivered early through cesarean section. The journey over here was a bit tough on them and the doctors were worried.”
	“Should they have come here then? Shouldn’t they have had the babies back home?” Layla gave her an odd look. 
	“Do you think their mothers would have left if they had a choice?” Nova didn’t have an answer to that. One of the twins started fussing. The nurse put down the chart but before they could do anything, the other twin tightened its arm around its sibling, the fussing stopped. Layla sighed. “To know nothing but your siblings arm around you, and that makes everything okay. It’s so beautiful.” 
	“I’m an only child,” Nova retorted, just shy of petulant. She looked at Layla through the corner of her eye. “What about you?”
	Layla started to nod and then shook her head. “My brothers passed.”
	Fuck. 
	“Oh, shit, I’m so sorry,” Nova started but Layla shook her head and held up her hand. 
	“No, it’s okay. Just another tragic Earth backstory. But hey, that’s why we’re here, right?” Layla smiled at her. 
	Nova’s grandma’s disappearance notwithstanding, she didn’t really have a tragic Earth backstory. She grew up incredibly privileged and she knew this. Her parents had jobs, they had a home, food, shelter from the erratic weather patterns. They were even able to travel further north for vacations sometimes. Nova understood on some level that many people were suffering. More of the world was becoming inhabitable, they learned all about the Water Wars in school. But her grandma had taught her to see the beauty in what life there was left. That it was worth saving, and fighting for. But here she was, staring down at the first babies on Mars. The first babies to never feel real wind, real sun, to never know Earth. 
	“Come on, lots to show you!” Layla gestured to Nova to follow her out of the sick bay. 
	Every place Layla took her to, Nova was familiar with but also not. They went to the school where her aunt taught and played a game with the kids, Layla explained the how the “outdoor” recess area was designed to mimic old playgrounds and even when the kids weren’t there, had set hours for sun, rain, and wind, to strengthen the plants and trees, just like the parks around the compound. She showed her the gardens that supplied the food halls, the recycling systems that fed into the water and compost and other materials. How every piece of “waste” wasn’t wasted at all, but reused in some capacity. 
	Towards the afternoon Nova was tired. Also a little impressed, but she wouldn’t admit it. They really had thought of everything when putting this community together. But she still couldn’t help but feel that something was missing. They walked onto the observation deck, an area Nova had distinctly avoided. It was the place in the whole compound that felt most… other. She looked at Layla, who looked into Mars’ atmosphere with such wonder on her face. 
	“It’s just so amazing, what we’ve been able to do in such a short amount of time. The people we’ve been able to help, to save.” Layla said, staring out into space. She looked at Nova and Nova sighed. 
	“Look, I get it, I really do. But don’t you miss it down there? Don’t you wish we could have saved our home instead?” Layla looked at her for a minute. Nova started feeling uncomfortable having those big brown eyes look straight at her. She looked back out. 
	“We had very different upbringings,” Layla said quietly. “Growing up, I wished an asteroid would just hit Earth and destroy everything-everyone. Like the dinosaurs. There was so much suffering, sickness, and starvation. I didn’t understand why I was alive or what the point of it was. Why be born just to suffer and die? And when my brothers died, I wanted to die, too. I would have, but someone saved me.” Nova was quiet, listening intently. 
	“He was… an uncle? Kind of? My mom was drugged out of her mind most of the time, trying to feel nothing. But he looked out for me and my brothers. He couldn’t save them, but after they died he helped me get up north. He used to be a professor before the Water Wars, taught agricultural engineering, but he was vocal about his beliefs and lost everything.”
	Nova was familiar with some of these stories, how academics were punished for their views, their work before and during the Water Wars. It wasn’t new, it happened throughout history. People in power were always afraid of those with knowledge of the truth, and especially those unafraid to dispense it. 
	“And when we made our way up north I was even more angry,” Layla chuckles like she doesn’t quite believe it. “It was the first time I saw a house. And then a bunch of homeless people camped down the street. Where I grew up, no one had any resources, we tried to take care of each other but we couldn’t even take care of ourselves. Up north there were so many resources! But an unequal distribution. And no reason for it.” 
	Layla sighed. “It’s too late for earth. Space for Future isn’t just some company that was looking ahead, they knew. The organization has been around for around four hundred years.”
	“Wait, what?” Nova looked at Layla, startled. 
	“Since the start of the industrial revolution,” Layla says with a half smile. “A group of academics, from around the world, mind you, not just the west, have been planning for the future of humans for centuries. They could see the pollution in their communities, the greed of politicians, the ebb and flow of the chasm between the rich and the poor. They knew one day the earth would fight back. So they started to plan. It was easier after the moon landing, when being in space started to be an option in the public eye. And after the Water Wars, when most of the governments were dismantled and everything was in chaos… They could become public. Work out in the open.” 	
	Nova stared at her for a moment. “So… you’re telling me you had this interest in cults as a teenager only to… join a cult?”
	Layla looked at her a little exasperated. Nova was a bit happy about that. “That’s what you’re taking out of this story of generations of scientists, architects, engineers, artists, teachers, planning for a better future for humanity?!” 
	“Why do you care about that, though? After how you grew up, what you went through. What changed?” Nova asked. 
	“Meeting people like your grandmother,” Layla said simply. The hairs on the back of Nova’s neck stood on end. 
	“What did you say?” 
	“Your grandmother, she would sometimes do guest lectures at the university. Didn’t you know that?” 
	“On what?” Nova asked, incredulous. 
	“She-Nova, your grandma is a leading astrophysicist.” Nova looked at Layla with her mouth open.. 
	“Excuse me?!” Nova squeaked. 
	“Are you being serious right now?” Layla looked around the empty room, as if expecting a prank. “Your dad talks about how she taught him everything he knows, she has written so many papers, you’re named Nova!” 
	Nova felt like she needed to sit down. “But she loved Earth. She didn’t want to be here, she wouldn’t come here. I was going to stay with her. But she-” she stopped herself. Layla looked at her with empathy, which usually made Nova angry but not this time. Layla… knew her grandma. Knew a side of her Nova had no idea existed. “Why did she lie?”
	“Did she lie?” Layla asked, curiously. “I was sad when I heard she wasn’t coming here but I wasn’t surprised. Not really.” Nova looked up at her and Layla shrugged. “I learned a lot from your grandmother, but I also know a lot about people, and their natures. She has a god complex. She’s not done saving every tree and insect and bird that’s left on earth, even if she can’t save them all.”
	Nova felt her head spinning and probably looked like she was going to vomit, because Layla gently led her to a bench and they sat down. Though all the things Layla was saying was making her lose her mind a little bit, the way she was talking was keeping her tethered, solid. She was talking about her grandma in the present tense. Her family had all but given up hope. They wouldn’t dare say so in front of Nova but she could tell. 
	“Your grandma saw importance, and worth in everything and everyone. She taught me that the world isn’t out to get me. The world is just… the world. People are just people. And a lot of times they are scared, and scared animals lash out. She believed in nature, and humanity and… in this.” Layla gestured around her. “And she believed in you.”bNova looked up at her sharply. 
	“I was pretty jealous of you,” Layla chuckled. “Dr. Strata’s precious granddaughter, who could name trees and plants while other kids played with blocks. In a room full of students who had their eyes towards space, she said you were the ideal of the future. Someone who loved earth not for what it could do for her but for what it was. Someone who could take their love of the natural world and pour it into a space that, for all intents and purposes, is unnatural. And through that, make it home.”
	They sat in silence for a few minutes after that. 
	“Why didn’t she ever tell me any of this?” Nova asked quietly. Layla shrugged. 
	“Had to let you figure some things out yourself, I guess?” Layla said. Nova felt tears sting her eyes. “She’s probably the wisest person I have ever met but she doesn’t know everything. She has her own weaknesses and fears. Maybe she was struggling between guiding you and having too much influence.”
	“It just feels like a betrayal,” Nova’s voice cracked and she hated it. “I wanted to stay with her, I wanted to-” she cut herself off before she started crying in front of Layla. Layla sighed. 
	“Yeah, she’s stubborn as hell,” that got a surprised snort out of Nova. “To be honest, I think she went out looking for more people like you,” Layla nudged Nova’s arm with her own. “People who are equally as stubborn,” Nova scoffed and rubbed her eyes, “people who can name trees and will remember what good wind and water felt like. There are so many people here looking to the future, wanting to forget. But we need Novas, too. We need angry daughters of Earth to remind us what we lost. So we don’t lose it again.” 
	“Fuck, Layla,” Nova sniffed, looking sideways at the other woman. “An academic, a tv personality, and a poet?” 	
	Layla grinned and held out her hands. “What can I say? I had to be multi-faceted to survive.”
	Nova looked at her for a minute. “I’m sorry, Layla.”
	Layla cocked her head to the side, “what for.”
	“I’m sorry for the hard things in your life, for everything you lost, and how far you had to travel and how hard you had to work for the good. I don’t think the world has ever been fair and there are certainly so many people still suffering, but I wish them futures like Layla. Creating their dream world with hope in their eyes.”
	Layla was quiet for a moment, her eyes glistening. “Fuck, Nova. Now who’s the poet?” Nova barked out a laugh. 
	“I can’t believe you swear!”
	“Okay, don’t put me on a pedestal, you already know I had a rough upbringing. I almost got kicked out of school for calling my calculus prof a shifty-eyed fuckwit.” Layla grinned. 
	“Well, was he?” Nova asked. 
	“Damn straight!” Layla said in a serious tone. They looked at each other and then laughed until their sides hurt. When the laughter died down they still looked at each other. Nova was the first to break eye contact, huffing. 
	“Well, fine. I’ll do it, I’ll work on the website, or whatever. I… I want to see this place like you do,” Nova looked at Layla who at first smiled shyly and then grinned in what Nova was learning was her usual way, showing all her teeth and her eyes crinkly. 
	“All right, well then, come on Nova, the future awaits,” Layla stands up and holds out her hand. Nova takes it.



	
